# Research idea initiation
# ollama run gemma3n:L "My name is riky and currently is studying in Law Faculty of Universitas Islam Bandung. I have a research idea regarding the uncertainty of privacy and security of patients electronic medical records after the new regulations released by health ministry of indonesia related to healthcare data interoperability across hospitals in indonesia. My supervising lecturer suggest me to structure the draft from introduction, literature review, methodology, analysis (including das sein and das sollen), results and discussion, and end with conclusion. Now build a comprehensive table of contents which shall be used as a guidance in further writing. Note: the research questions are supposed to be about addressing the uncertainty and implication of the newly released regulations." >> toc.md

# Summarizing sources for introduction
# ollama run gemma3n:L "I'm writing a research paper for publication in law journal. I've collected numerous news articles to be cited in the paper, though not all of them has to be involved. First, please make a detailed and comprehensive summary of the collected articles below, or facts worth cited. If you find anything important or relevant, please put them in reference list following the APA format." < ./sources/news/combined.md >> ./sources/news/summary.md

# Building the introduction chapter
# ollama run gemma3n:L "I'm writing a research paper for publication in law journal. I've prepared the table of contents along with collected relevant information from recent news. Please write the introduction chapter and sub-chapters as comprehensive as you can following the guidance in the table of contents, ended with the research questions. Paragraphs format are more preferable, tables are optional. I expect to have 5 to 6 pages for this chapter. Feel free to cite any or all of the collected recent information relevant to the research in APA format." < toc.md < ./sources/news/summary.md >> introduction.md

# Collecting references
ollama run gemma3n:L "I'd like to start collecting citations from google scholar for relevant articles in the literature review chapter. Can you build me the search query which can yield relevant results?" < toc.md >> search_scholar.md
