Here is a collection of citations and abstracts from journals related to eletrnonic healthcare interoperability, privacy, and security. The citations are in MLA format.

Naveed, Arjmand, et al. "Addressing semantic interoperability, privacy and security concerns in electronic health records." Journal of Engineering and Scientific Research 2.1 (2020): 31-38.

The use of Electronic Health Records (EHR) in healthcare has the potential of reducing medical errors, minimizing healthcare cost and significantly improving the healthcare service quality. However, there is a barrier in healthcare data and information exchange between various healthcare systems due to the lack of interoperability. Also, with the implementation of EHR system, there are security and privacy concerns in the storage and transferring data entities.  The healthcare interoperability problem remains an issue of further research and this paper proposes a semantic interoperability framework for solving  this problem by allowing healthcare stakeholders and organizations (doctors, clinics, hospitals)using various healthcare standards to exchange data and its semantics, which can be understood by both machines and humans. Moreover, the proposed framework takes into consideration the security aspects in the semantic interoperability framework by utilizing data encryption and other technologies to secure the communication for the EHR information while ensuring real time data availability.

Tertulino, Rodrigo, Nuno Antunes, and Higor Morais. "Privacy in electronic health records: a systematic mapping study." Journal of Public Health 32.3 (2024): 435-454.

Electronic health record (EHR) applications are digital versions of paper-based patient health information. Traditionally, medical records are made on paper. However, nowadays, advances in information and communication technology have made it possible to change medical records from paper to EHR. Therefore, preserving user data privacy is extremely important in healthcare environments. The main challenges are providing ways to make EHR systems increasingly capable of ensuring data privacy and at the same time not compromising the performance and interoperability of these systems. This systematic mapping study intends to investigate the current research on security and privacy requirements in EHR systems and identify potential research gaps in the literature. The main challenges are providing ways to make EHR systems increasingly capable of ensuring data privacy, and at the same time, not compromising the performance and interoperability of these systems. Our research was carried out in the Scopus database, the largest database of abstracts and citations in the literature with peer review. We have collected 848 articles related to the area. After disambiguation and filtering, we selected 30 articles for analysis. The result of such an analysis provides a comprehensive view of current research. We can highlight some relevant research possibilities. First, we noticed a growing interest in privacy in EHR research in the last 6 years. Second, blockchain has been used in many EHR systems as a solution to achieve data privacy. However, it is a challenge to maintain traceability by recording metadata that can be mapped to private data of the users applying a particular mapping function that can be hosted outside the blockchain. Finally, the lack of a systematic approach between EHR solutions and existing laws or policies leads to better strategies for developing a certification process for EHR systems.

Shen, Yun, et al. "Twenty-five years of evolution and hurdles in electronic health records and interoperability in medical research: comprehensive review." Journal of Medical Internet Research 27 (2025): e59024.

Electronic health records (EHRs) facilitate the accessibility and sharing of patient data among various health care providers, contributing to more coordinated and efficient care. This study aimed to summarize the evolution of secondary use of EHRs and their interoperability in medical research over the past 25 years. We conducted an extensive literature search in the PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases using the keywords Electronic health record and Electronic medical record in the title or abstract and Medical research in all fields from 2000 to 2024. Specific terms were applied to different time periods. The review yielded 2212 studies, all of which were then screened and processed in a structured manner. Of these 2212 studies, 2102 (93.03%) were included in the review analysis, of which 1079 (51.33%) studies were from 2000 to 2009, 582 (27.69%) were from 2010 to 2019, 251 (11.94%) were from 2020 to 2023, and 190 (9.04%) were from 2024. The evolution of EHRs marks an important milestone in health care’s journey toward integrating technology and medicine. From early documentation practices to the sophisticated use of artificial intelligence and big data analytics today, EHRs have become central to improving patient care, enhancing public health surveillance, and advancing medical research. Our study contributes to the existing body of literature by providing the perspectives of patients and carers most likely to encounter interoperability challenges and therefore those most ideally positioned to propose potential solutions. As highlighted by patients, researchers and policymakers should consider social, educational, and organisational solutions, in addition to technical solutions. Lack of interoperability (i.e., the ability to share a patient’s health information electronically between healthcare providers) can affect the quality of care received. However, much of the existing research was done from the viewpoint of healthcare staff rather than from patients themselves. This study explored the views of patients regarding what they feel interoperability in the NHS is currently like, how they think it affects their care, and what they think can be done to improve it. Patients reported interoperability to often be poor. It caused inconvenience both to themselves and their healthcare provider, and negatively impacted their experience getting care overall. Patient suggestions for improvement included centralising and reducing the number of existing systems, having more training for healthcare staff, and supporting patients and other healthcare staff in managing their health data.

Rezaeibagha, Fatemeh, Khin Than Win, and Willy Susilo. "A systematic literature review on security and privacy of electronic health record systems: technical perspectives." Health Information Management Journal 44.3 (2015): 23-38.

Even though many safeguards and policies for electronic health record (EHR) security have been implemented, barriers to the privacy and security protection of EHR systems persist. This article presents the results of a systematic literature review regarding frequently adopted security and privacy technical features of EHR systems. Our inclusion criteria were full articles that dealt with the security and privacy of technical implementations of EHR systems published in English in peer-reviewed journals and conference proceedings between 1998 and 2013; 55 selected studies were reviewed in detail. We analysed the review results using two International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards (29100 and 27002) in order to consolidate the study findings. Using this process, we identified 13 features that are essential to security and privacy in EHRs. These included system and application access control, compliance with security requirements, interoperability, integration and sharing, consent and choice mechanism, policies and regulation, applicability and scalability and cryptography techniques. This review highlights the importance of technical features, including mandated access control policies and consent mechanisms, to provide patients' consent, scalability through proper architecture and frameworks, and interoperability of health information systems, to EHR security and privacy requirements.

Bhalla, Subhash, Shelly Sachdeva, and Shivani Batra. "Semantic interoperability in electronic health record databases: Standards, architecture and e-health systems." International conference on big data analytics. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017.

Information systems have been deployed in different clinics and hospitals to preserve patient data. In order to promote the exchange of data among systems (and organizations), standards are being adopted for data exchange. Further, the clinics and hospitals aim to manage a patient’s life-time history of records. A piece of the individual patient’s medical record can be captured, stored, queried, and shared over a network through enrichment in information technology. Thus, electronic health records (EHRs) are being standardized for incorporating semantic interoperability. In addition, a generic storage structure is required to capture distinguished data requirements of various organizations. The generic structure must be capable of dealing with sparseness and frequent evolution behavior of EHRs. A subsequent step requires that healthcare professionals and patients get to use the EHRs, with the help of technological developments, such as workflow toolkits and new (easy) query languages. The goal is to present an overview of different approaches in understanding some current and challenging concepts in e-health informatics. Successful handling of these challenges will lead to improved quality in healthcare by reducing medical errors, decreasing costs, and enhancing patient care. The report is focused on the following objectives: (1) understanding the role of EHRs Databases; (2) understanding the need for standardization to enhance quality; (3) establishing interoperability in maintaining EHRs; (4) explicating a framework for standardization and interoperability (the openEHR architecture); (5) exploring various data models for managing EHRs; and (6) understanding the difficulties in querying data in EHR and e-health systems.

Roehrs, Alex, et al. "Toward a model for personal health record interoperability." IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics 23.2 (2018): 867-873.

Health information technology, applied to electronic health record (EHR), has evolved with the adoption of standards for defining patient health records. However, there are many standards for defining such data, hindering communication between different healthcare providers. Even with adopted standards, patients often need to repeatedly provide their health information when they are taken care of at different locations. This problem hinders the adoption of personal health record (PHR), with the patients' health records under their own control. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to propose an interoperability model for PHR use. The methodology consisted prototyping an application model named OmniPHR, to evaluate the structuring of semantic interoperability and integration of different health standards, using a real database from anonymized patients. We evaluated health data from a hospital database with 38 645 adult patients' medical records processed using different standards, represented by openEHR, HL7 FHIR, and MIMIC-III reference models. OmniPHR demonstrated the feasibility to provide interoperability through a standard ontology and artificial intelligence with natural language processing (NLP). Although the first executions reached a 76.39% F1-score and required retraining of the machine-learning process, the final score was 87.9%, presenting a way to obtain the original data from different standards on a single format. Unlike other models, OmniPHR presents a unified, structural semantic and up-to-date vision of PHR for patients and healthcare providers. The results were promising and demonstrated the possibility of subsidizing the creation of inferences rules about possible patient health problems or preventing future problems

Palojoki, Sari, Lasse Lehtonen, and Riikka Vuokko. "Semantic interoperability of electronic health records: Systematic review of alternative approaches for enhancing patient information availability." JMIR medical informatics 12.1 (2024): e53535.

Semantic interoperability facilitates the exchange of and access to health data that are being documented in electronic health records (EHRs) with various semantic features. The main goals of semantic interoperability development entail patient data availability and use in diverse EHRs without a loss of meaning. Internationally, current initiatives aim to enhance semantic development of EHR data and, consequently, the availability of patient data. Interoperability between health information systems is among the core goals of the European Health Data Space regulation proposal and the World Health Organization’s Global Strategy on Digital Health 2020-2025. To achieve integrated health data ecosystems, stakeholders need to overcome challenges of implementing semantic interoperability elements. To research the available scientific evidence on semantic interoperability development, we defined the following research questions: What are the key elements of and approaches for building semantic interoperability integrated in EHRs? What kinds of goals are driving the development? and What kinds of clinical benefits are perceived following this development? Our research questions focused on key aspects and approaches for semantic interoperability and on possible clinical and semantic benefits of these choices in the context of EHRs. Therefore, we performed a systematic literature review in PubMed by defining our study framework based on previous research. Our analysis consisted of 14 studies where data models, ontologies, terminologies, classifications, and standards were applied for building interoperability. All articles reported clinical benefits of the selected approach to enhancing semantic interoperability. We identified 3 main categories: increasing the availability of data for clinicians (n=6, 43%), increasing the quality of care (n=4, 29%), and enhancing clinical data use and reuse for varied purposes (n=4, 29%). Regarding semantic development goals, data harmonization and developing semantic interoperability between different EHRs was the largest category (n=8, 57%). Enhancing health data quality through standardization (n=5, 36%) and developing EHR-integrated tools based on interoperable data (n=1, 7%) were the other identified categories. The results were closely coupled with the need to build usable and computable data out of heterogeneous medical information that is accessible through various EHRs and databases (eg, registers). When heading toward semantic harmonization of clinical data, more experiences and analyses are needed to assess how applicable the chosen solutions are for semantic interoperability of health care data. Instead of promoting a single approach, semantic interoperability should be assessed through several levels of semantic requirements A dual model or multimodel approach is possibly usable to address different semantic interoperability issues during development. The objectives of semantic interoperability are to be achieved in diffuse and disconnected clinical care environments. Therefore, approaches for enhancing clinical data availability should be well prepared, thought out, and justified to meet economically sustainable and long-term outcomes.

Garde, Sebastian, et al. "Towards semantic interoperability for electronic health records." Methods of information in medicine 46.03 (2007): 332-343.

Objectives: In the field of open electronic health records (EHRs), openEHR as an archetype-based approach is being increasingly recognised. It is the objective of this paper to shortly describe this approach, and to analyse how openEHR archetypes impact on health professionals and semantic interoperability. Analysis of current approaches to EHR systems, terminology and standards developments. In addition to literature reviews, we organised face-to-face and additional telephone interviews and tele-conferences with members of relevant organisations and committees. The openEHR archetypes approach enables syntactic interoperability and semantic interpretability – both important prerequisites for semantic interoperability. Archetypes enable the formal definition of clinical content by clinicians. To enable comprehensive semantic interoperability, the development and maintenance of archetypes needs to be coordinated internationally and across health professions. Domain knowledge governance comprises a set of processes that enable the creation, development, organisation, sharing, dissemination, use and continuous maintenance of archetypes. It needs to be supported by information technology. To enable EHRs, semantic interoperability is essential. The openEHR archetypes approach enables syntactic interoperability and semantic interpretability. However, without coordinated archetype development and maintenance, ‘rank growth’ of archetypes would jeopardize semantic interoperability. We therefore believe that openEHR archetypes and domain knowledge governance together create the knowledge environment required to adopt EHRs.

De Mello, Blanda Helena, et al. "Semantic interoperability in health records standards: a systematic literature review." Health and technology 12.2 (2022): 255-272.

The integration and exchange of information among health organizations and system providers are currently regarded as a challenge. Each organization usually has an internal ecosystem and a proprietary way to store electronic health records of the patient’s history. Recent research explores the advantages of an integrated ecosystem by exchanging information between the different inpatient care actors. Many efforts seek quality in health care, economy, and sustainability in process management. Some examples are reducing medical errors, disease control and monitoring, individualized patient care, and avoiding duplicate and fragmented entries in the electronic medical record. Likewise, some studies showed technologies to achieve this goal effectively and efficiently, with the ability to interoperate data, allowing the interpretation and use of health information. To that end, semantic interoperability aims to share data among all the sectors in the organization, clinicians, nurses, lab, the entire hospital. Therefore, avoiding data silos and keep data regardless of vendors, to exchange the information across organizational boundaries. This study presents a comprehensive systematic literature review of semantic interoperability in electronic health records. We searched seven databases of articles published between 2010 to September 2020. We showed the most chosen scenarios, technologies, and tools employed to solve interoperability problems, and we propose a taxonomy around semantic interoperability in health records. Also, we presented the main approaches to solve the exchange problem of legacy and heterogeneous data across healthcare organizations.

